---
title: Sessions 15-16 Strategic Leadership and Strategy Failure
categories: [STG]
comments: true
---
# Sessions 15-16 Strategic Leadership and Strategy Failure

## 1. Why did Boo. com fail? -- from boom to bust

**Introduction**
- Boo.com established in the 2000 dot.com era to sell high fashion branded sportswear, through the creation of a new shopping experience using advanced technology.
- Failed after 6 months of active business causing investors to lose almost US\$128 million. 
- Boo.com was first of a string of high profile dot.com failures in early 2000s and its failure had strong repercussions for dot.com investments.

**Experience**
April 99: Initial financing complete. Implied valuation of \$240m
May 99: 150 staff in offices in London, New York, Stockholm, Paris, Amsterdam, Munich. Original launch date missed
July 99: 200 staff. Fortune: "One of 50 coolest companies" 2nd launch date missed
Sept 99: 2nd round financing. Business valued at \$390m
Oct 99: 3rd launch date missed. Spending > \$7m/month
Nov 99: Boo.com launches
Dec 99: 3rd round financing. 100 staff cut / Boom closed Dean Hawkins joins as CFO 
Feb 2000: Burn rate remains > ​\$1m per week Sales < ​\$1m per month New CFO Dean Hawkins resigns after 2 months
May 2000: Boo.com closes. ​\$128m of investors funds lost!

## 2. Were there early warning signs? 

**Early Warning Signs**
1. **Unnecessary complexity**
- Is the company’s organizational structure convoluted or complex?
- Is its strategy unnecessarily complex for an otherwise simple problem?
- Is its accounting overly complicated, non-transparent, or nonstandard?
- Is it employing complicated or nonstandard terminology?

2. **Speeding out of control**
- Does the management team have enough experience to handle growth?
- Are there small, yet nontrivial, details of problems that seem to be getting overlooked by management?
- Is management ignoring warnings now that could lead to problems later?
- Is the company so successful or so dominant that it’s no longer in touch with what it needs to do to remain on top?
- Do the unplanned departures of senior executives signify deeper problems?

3. **The distracted CEO**
- Do I have unanswered questions about the CEO’s background and talent?
- Is the CEO spending too much money to fulfil personal missions that don’t necessarily benefit the company?
- Are company leaders so consumed by money and greed that they’re taking questionable or inappropriate actions?
4. **A question of character**
- Is it possible that the excitement around the company’s new product is just hype?
- Could the excitement around the company’s merger or acquisition be hype?
- Is the excitement around the company’s prospects just unfulfilled hype?
- Is the latest missed milestone part of a pattern that could signify deeper problems?

5. **Excessive hype**
- Are the CEO and other senior executives so aggressive or overconfident that I 
don’t really trust them?

**Reacting to Early Warning Signs Depends on…..**
- Your personal risk tolerance
- The socio-political environment

**Strategic Leadership is NOT Strategic Planning**
➢ It is generally impossible to forecast the future!
➢ Strategy needs to be based in the present (the “here and now”)
➢ “The core of strategy work is discovering the critical factors in a situation and designing a way of co-ordinating and focusing actions to deal with these factors.” *(Rumelt, 2011)*

**Good Strategy involves:**

- An insightful diagnosis of the situation at hand
- An overall approach (guiding policy) for dealing with the critical issues 
- A set of coherent actions


## 3. Could Boo.com have been turned around? 

**Summary: Effective Recovery Strategies (key elements identified by prior research) **
*From Session 13-14*

- Focus on the **core business** coupled with **retrenchment** from **unprofitable** activities
- **Clear and improved** competitive positioning within the core business, with a **distinctive value** proposition based on an understanding of customer needs
- **Strong cost control**, which focuses on the elimination of high cost activities that deliver little customer value
- A positive and committed **management approach**, often achieved through leadership and accompanying culture change
- Controlled **future** development, with growth pursued only once financial stability restored and then based on recognition and leveraging of the firm’s underlying strategic capabilities

## 4. Why do smart executives sometimes fail: The seven habits of spectacularly unsuccessful executives

**"Why Smart Executives Fail" Study**  *(Finkelstein, 2003)* 

> - Focus on strategic failure and the lessons to be learnt
> - Professor Sydney Finkelstein, Steven Roth Professor of Management, Tuck Business School, Dartmouth College
> - Six year research programme 1997-2003
> - Sample: 51 companies suffering "major business failure" - cross-section of industries, some non-US
> - Data Sources: 
> 	- company reports & accounts
> 	- press/analysts reports
> 	- 197 interviews with executives

> - "We're talking about people whose failures were breathtakingly gigantic, who have taken world-renowned business operations and made them almost worthless."
> - "Remarkably enough, it's possible to identify seven habits that characterise spectacularly unsuccessful people. Nearly all the leaders who preside over major business failures exhibit five or six of these habits. Many all seven."
> - "Even more remarkable, each of these habits represents a quality that is widely admired in today’s business world"



1. They see themselves and their companies as **dominating their environments.** 
2. They identify so completely with their company that there is **no clear boundary** between personal and corporate interests.
3. They think they have **all** the **answers**.
4. They ruthlessly **eliminate** anyone who isn’t 100% behind them. 
5. They are consummate company **spokespersons**, obsessed with the company **image**. 
6. They **underestimate** major obstacles.
7. They stubbornly rely on what worked for them in the **past**.



> - "Remarkably enough, it's possible to identify seven habits that characterise spectacularly unsuccessful people. Nearly all the leaders who preside over major business failures exhibit five or six of these habits. Many all seven."
> - "Learning to recognise these habits is the first step toward finding ways to compensate for them"



**Some implications**

- *As Leaders:* Are you liable to slip into any of the habits? 
- *As Non-Exec Directors:* Is one or more of the habits having an undue influence on the CEO’s behaviour?Are these early warning signs?
- *As Investors:* Be aware!




## *Relevant References*
> - Strategic Failure and Leadership
> - Finkelstein, S. (2003) Why Smart Executives Fail. Penguin Putnam.
> - Finkelstein, S. (2003) Seven Habits of Spectacularly Unsuccessful People. Business Strategy Review, Vol. 14 (4), pp39-50.