---
title: Sessions 11-12 Strategic Decision-making
categories: [STG]
comments: ture
---
# Sessions 11-12 Strategic Decision-making

**Target**

- Distinguish **strategic decisions** from **routine decisions**.
- Analyse the differences between **rational** and **cognitive** approaches to decision-making in organizations.
- Evaluate the impact of **common heuristics** and **biases** on organizational decision-making.
- Examine and practice tools and techniques available for managers to improve the quality of their decision-making processes – **cognitive mapping**

## Routine decisions and strategic decisions

> **Mintzberg et al. (1976):**
> strategic decisions are large, expensive, and precedent-setting decisions that are made under conditions of ambiguity and uncertainty about the final decision outcome.

**Characteristics of Strategic Decisions** (Nutt and Wilson, 2010):

- They deal with complex problems which are hard to define.
- The outcomes are risky and shrouded in uncertainty and ambiguity.
- They rarely have one best solution, but rather a series of possible solutions.
- They involve trade-offs and the setting of organizational priorities, as scarce resources have to be allocated to a possible solution to the problem.
- They are influenced by competing political interests that may bias decision makers towards a solution that aligns with their preferences.
- They are often connected with other organizational problems, which warrant additional decision-making.

## The six-step rational decision-making model
The ‘rational’ decision-making model prescribes us to apply the following six steps to each scenario (Bazerman and Moore 2009)
1. Define the problem
2. Identify decision criteria
3. Weigh the criteria
4. Generate alternatives
5. Rate each alternative on each criterion
6. Compute the optimal decision

## The bounds of rationality (理性的界限)

> - Herbert Simon suggested that all human judgement is bounded (or limited) in its rationality, and we can better understand decision-making by describing and explaining actual decisions rather than by focusing on what should be done rationally in decision-making processes (March and Simon 1958). 
> - While Simon’s framework of ‘bounded rationality’ views people as attempting to make rational decisions, it acknowledges that there are limitations that prevent us from making rational decisions as prescribed by the rational decision-making model.
> - Satisficing (satisfactory and sufficient)

## Managerial heuristics (启发式管理)
When we make decision, two things are happening:
**System One & System Two thinking (思考快与慢)**

|System One thinking | System Two thinking |
| :---- | :---- |
| Intuitive | Reflective |
| Automatic | Requires a concerted effort |
| Produces a constant representation of the world around us | Activated when we are faced with problems where the stakes are high |
| Leads to action: effortless, and leads us to do things, and form instant opinions | Slow, deliberate |

**Common heuristics (常见的启发式)**

| Heuristic | Definition | Example |
|:----|:----|:----|
|Representativeness|A tendency to assume that what we see or will see is typical of what can occur|Assumption that colleagues who act in a friendly manner, are genuinely friendly and cooperative|
|Availability|A tendency to assume that what could happen in a new situation will be the same as what we have seen or experienced in the past|assumption that the acquisition under consideration will work out as well as our previously well executed acquisition|
|Anchoring and adjustment|A tendency to make judgements based on an initial assessment as an anchor, but failing to make sufficient adjustments later on as new information is revealed|contract price negotiation becomes anchored on the initial cost quoted by the contractor rather than on a fully objective cost assessment|
|Affect|A tendency to allow emotions such as fear and pleasure to guide our decision-making|Negative feelings about nuclear power may lead to overstating its risks and understating its benefits|


## Collective decision-making
- **Devil’s advocacy**
	Devil’s advocacy involves a group developing a solid argument for a recommended course of action and subjecting that recommendation to an in-depth formal critique.
- **Dialectical enquiry**
	Essentially, dialectical enquiry is a debate between two opposing sets of viewpoints. Although it stimulates programmed conflict, it is a constructive approach because it elicits the benefits and limitations of opposing sets of ideas.
- **Consensus decision-making**
	A consensus approach is one where the agreement of the whole group is sought for a decision.
- **The Delphi method**
	The Delphi method allows experts to work towards a mutual agreement by conducting and circulating series of questionnaires and releasing related feedback to further the discussion with each subsequent round. The experts’ responses shift as rounds are completed, based on the information produced by other experts participating in the analysis
## Cognitive mapping
- Cognitive mapping, causal mapping, is a simple and useful technique for addressing situations where thinking, individual or group, matters:
	- it can help an individual understand a situation better and act effectively on it
	- it can help groups build a better understanding of a strategic problem and create effective action.
- A causal map is a word-and-arrow diagram in which ideas and actions are causally linked with one another.
- The arrows indicate how one idea or action leads to another.

## Characteristics of mapping
- Cognitive mapping help people to think in natural way
	constructing, elaborating, revising, and re-revising a system of interconnected concepts (“constructs”)
- The concepts embody a set of comparisons and contrasts:
	To know what something is, we need to know at least one thing it is like - the **comparison** - and one thing it is not like -the **contrast**; this leads us to:
	- make sense of our world;
	- create distinctions that make a difference;
	- anticipate the future;
	- take action based on our anticipations;
	- make sense of the results of out actions;
	- begin again in a context that is in some sense different, at least partially as a result of our actions.

miro.com